:toc: left
:toclevels: 5

= OPTE

The Oxide Packet Transformation Engine, or OPTE for short, is a
generic, flexible packet filtering and transformation engine. It takes
a steam of packets as input, sends them through a configurable,
dynamic processing pipeline, and produces a stream of packets as
output. It's much like a Match-Action Table found in a typical
hardware switch, but with a focus on stateful flows like TCP/IP. RFD
63, *Network Architecture*, desrcibes the design of the Oxide Rack
Network along with the role OPTE plays within it.

NOTE: The reference documentation is a work-in-progress; living here
for the time being.

== Architecture

The architecture of OPTE is greatly influenced by the design of
https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/vfp-virtual-switch-platform-host-sdn-public-cloud/[Microsoft's
VFP].

=== Direction

Many aspects of OPTE have a notion of direction: which way the packet
is flowing.

Inbound::
The packet is flowing from the port towards the guest.

Outbound::
The packet is flow from the guest towards the port.

=== Layers

OPTE abstracts the processing of packets to a series of layers through
which each packet must pass. Much like layers in the TCP/IP model,
they demarcate different aspects of packet processing which must take
place. Each layer is comprised of a set of actions and a set of rules.
The rules are further demarcated between the <<_direction,inbound>>
and <<_direction,outbound>> directions. The ultimate purpose of a
layer is to match pakcets to rules, and those rules to actions. The
end result is some action being taken either on the packet itself or
some side-effect which may affect later layers (where "later" depends
on the direction the packet is flowing).

=== Rules

A rule matches zero, one, or more <<_predicates>> to an action. Rules live
inside of <<_layers>>.

=== Predicates

XXX: Describe what predicates are and how we use them.

=== Actions

XXX: Describe difference between static, statefule, hairpin, etc.

=== Pipeline Metadata

XXX: Describe mutable metadata passed through the piepline and how
actions use it.

=== Packet

XXX: Describe how packets are read, parsed, and modified.

=== Flow Tables

XXX: Describe how layers cache the result of rule processing to map
"flows" (TCP/UDP) to cached actions.

=== Unified Flow Table

XXX: Describe what the UFT is and how the ultimate goal is to compile
the various layer actions into a UFT entry so that only a handful of
packets pay the full cost of layer/rule processing.

=== Header Transformations

XXX: Describe what HTs are and how they are defined in such a way as
to easily compose into a cached action in the UFT.

XXX: I originally called these Header Transpositions like VFP, but the
more I think about it the more I'd rather call them transformations as
it's a) a bit more general the transposition (i.e. tranposition
suggests the rearranging of headers, whereas we often will either not
modify the headers at all or will add/remove headers, which is more in
line with transforming), and b) it aligns with the T in OPTE.

=== OPTE vs. Network Definitions

While the current codebase conflates these two a bit, there is ongoing
effort to clearly separate the generic engine (OPTE) from its
configuration as an implementation of a specific network vis-Ã -vis the
Oxide Rack Network.footnote:[While you won't find anything in the RFDs about
the Oxide "Rack" Network, I'm adding this qualifier to empahsize that
there may be other future networks in an Oxide environment that we
want to implement, which may be separate from the one desrcibed in RFD
63].

A "network definition" is simply a particular configuration of OPTE,
from which a particular network implementation is derived. The current
codebase defines the Oxide Rack Network under the `oxide_net` module
(the plan is to eventually move this out to its own crate, or perhaps
make it part of opte-drv).

XXX: Go into more depth about the nuance here.

=== OPTE running context

The core engine of OPTE, `opte-core`, is designed to run in either a
user or kernel context. When running in user context the engine may
take advantage of Rust's `std` library: providing heap allocation and
various system APIs. When running in kernel context the engine is
constrained to Rust's `core` and `alloc` libraries. The engine
**cannot** make use of `std` in this context for several reasons, the
main ones being:

* Some of the APIs `std` relies on do not exist in kernel context;
  others exist but in different form.

* The engine's functions may be called in more constrained contexts
  like interrupt context, requiring more careful consideration of the
  code allowed to execute.

The upshot of all this is that `opte-core` is designed with kernel
context in mind first, but at the same time is built with the shims
needed to lift it into userland when helpful. Currently the only
purpose, though one that has proven its value over and over again, is
to run unit tests and simulate traffic against the engine. For this
reason it's imperative that the engine continues to be developed so
that it can run in both contexts.

NOTE: The running context of OPTE **must** be determined at compile
time. That is, you cannot compile OPTE in such a way that the
resulting object code can run in user or kernel context. Rather, there
is an additional step of having another executable object that uses
(or "wraps") OPTE providing the communication between it and the
greater system. This wrapping executable will naturally dictate how
`opte-core` is compiled in that case. For example, the `xde` kernel
driver uses the `opte-core` code in kernel context to provide the
Oxide VPC Network implementation. It is the liasion between the OPTE
and the greater system.

NOTE: When talking about "kernel context" we are limiting ourselves to
the illumos kernel only. It is a non-goal to maintain OPTE in a manner
that would allow it to run in other kernel environments such as Linux
or FreeBSD. To do so would require a kernel-shim layer in order to
present a single abstraction (say a mutex) with different kernel
implementations backing it. Shim layers like this often quickly
breakdown because the underlying abstractions ultimately leak into the
API (you see this in network drivers where FreeBSD uses a shim header
to map Linux network driver code into their kernel API and the result
is never pretty).

Allowing OPTE to run in user or kernel context is achieved using
different methods laid out below.

==== Synonym types

A synonym type is one that provides a kernel-context API which can be
replicated with high fidelity with a different API in user-context,
using a type from `std` or an external crate. When compiled for
kernel-context if provides a kernel API, when compiled for
user-context it presents a sort of "new type" pattern: opte-core
always uses the synonym type, but may be backed by an existing
`std`/crate type when compiled with `std` enabled.

The canonical example of this is the `opte_core::sync::KMutex` synonym
type. It provides a safe abstraction to the illumos kernel
https://illumos.org/man/9F/mutex_enter[mutex_enter(9F)] API when
compiled for kernel context. When compiled for user context it simply
uses `std::sync::Mutex` under the covers.

NOTE: One could argue that opte-core should just define this type as
Mutex, replicate the `std::sync::Mutex` API 1:1, and map that to the
underlying `mutex_enter(9F)` API. This mostly works, but if you look
closely cracks start to appear in the paint. The `std::sync::Mutex`
lives in the Rust `std` world, and that world needs to consider
non-abort panics: that is a thread that unwinds itself on panic
instead of aborting the entire process. For this reason the std mutex
returns a `Result` when attempting to lock the mutex. In the case that
a thread panics/unwinds while holding this mutex, it will be placed in
a poisened state and all future lock attempts (by other threads) will
return an error. Such a concern dost not exist in the illumos kernel:
if you panic the party is over. Therefore, there is no `Result` to
check when calling `lock()`: either you acquired the lock or you
ruined the party for everyone. Now, you could achieve this with
`Infalliable` in the error position, but it would still require
`unwrap()` calls against all the locks. This isn't the worst thing in
the world, but given OPTE's perogative to run in kernel context, all
`unwrap()` calls must be eyed with great suspicion, as anyone of them
could take out the entire host.

The upshot of a synonym type is that the kernel/user context problem
is solved at a type level, behind the type's implementation.

==== Providers

XXX Providers are also compile-time but allow more flexibility for
what types can stand in for a given API. Defined as trait that any
type can implement. Potentially allows operator to select at runtime
different implementations for a given context. Good example of this is
logging, where an basic API can be defined and kernel context can
define in terms of `cmn_err(9F)` and userland can have several impls
including `println!` or some logging crate (granted the developer
writes a shim for that crate to work with the provider trait define by
opte-core).

XXX While opte-core can provide an user context implementation of a
provider interface, it doesn't have to. This means the provider method
allows opte-core to distance itself from the user context
implementation while at the same time giving the developer more
freedom. For example, it means that opte-core doesn't have to pull in
third-party crates to provide these user context implementations and
instead can just provide the interface to which the developer of the
userland application needs to provide an impl. It's like a synonym
type but the developer of the user program provides the user context
impl. Which seems good for a type like `Periodic` where there is a
clear kernel API to use but perhaps an assortment of userland
providers a developer may want to choose from, and rather than have
opte-core provide the shim for all those crates it can simply as the
developer to write their own shim to the provider interface.

==== cfg/attribute based

XXX Some things ultimately can only exist in a specific context. Good
example of this is SDT probes, which are defined as symbols of the
form `__dtrace_probe_xxx`. These symbols mean nothing in user context.
However, there do exist USDT probes, which can emulate the kernel
context behavior. However, in order to do so we must restort to `cfg`
blocks.


== Communicating with OPTE

The `xde` device registers a single entry point with the DLD ioctl
framework. This entry point allows a client to send OPTE commands for
the purpose of programming the engine:

.entry point into `xde` via DLD
----
static xde_ioc_list: [dld::dld_ioc_info_t; 1] = [
    dld::dld_ioc_info_t {
        di_cmd: opte_core::ioctl::XDE_OPTE_CMD as u32,
        di_flags: dld::DLDCOPYINOUT,
        di_argsize: IOCTL_SZ,
        di_func: xde_dld_ioc_opte_cmd,
        di_priv_func: secpolicy::secpolicy_dl_config,
    },
];
----

There are four values which make up an OPTE command.

`OpteCmd`:: `OpteCmd` is analogous to the `ioctl(2)` `request`
argument: it's an integer used to determine what type of request is
being made; this value is used by the kernel side to determine how to
interpret the ioctl argument

`OpteCmdIoctl`:: `OpteCmdIoctl` is analogous to the `ioctl(2)` `arg`
command: a pointer to a structure whose definition is shared across
both userspace and kernelspace; in this case both `opteadm` running in
userland and the `opte-core` engine running in the kernel share a
consistent (`repr(C)`) layout of this structure. Think of it as the
common delivery mechanism for the various `XxxReq`/`XxxResp` pairs.

`XxxReq`:: The request value for a given `OpteCmd`. It contains the
input needed to perform the specified command. E.g., the
`ListLayersReq` requires a `port_name: String` argument to know which
port to query. This value is shuttled from user to kernel via
`OpteCmdIotcl.req_bytes`. It is serialized in userland, written to
`req_bytes`. On the kernel side `resp_bytes` is copied into Kernel
Address Space (KAS) and deserialized.

`XxxResp`:: The response value for a given `OpteCmd`. E.g., the
`ListLayersResp` value contains a `Vec<LayerDesc>` describing the
layers registered for the given port. A command that has no response
data specifies `NoResp`. This value is shuttled from kernel to user
via `OpteCmdIoctl.resp_bytes`. The `resp_bytes` buffer is allocated
and initialized by the client in userspace. In the kernel the response
structure is serialized and then copied out to the userspace address.
When control returns to userland the client can then deserialize the
response buffer into the appropriate struct.

There's one more value that plays an important role in OPTE commands
and separates the OPTE ioctl mechanism from the more traditional
`ioctl(2)` APIs: `OpteError`. The OPTE ioctl mechanism is built in
such a way that in the case of command failure it tries its best to
deliver an `OpteError` value to the client. This is done via the same
`OpteCmdIoctl.resp_bytes` buffer used for the `XxxResp` value when a
command is successful. This allows the client to get more context
about the error compared to the traditional `ioctl(2)` usage which
gives you only an `errno` to work with (which is often ambiguous and
of little immediate help). This allows for the client to potentially
take additional measures on command failure. At minimum it allows
client logs to contain much better context about why a command failed,
allowing for quicker debugging.

Finally, on the kernel side, there is the `IoctlEnvelope` for wrapping
`OpteCmdIoctl`. This type provides a safe API for accessing the
request and marshaling a response out to the user. It relieves the
handler code of having to know the details of
`ddi_copyin(9F)`/`ddi_copyout(9F)`; allowing them to focus purely on
executing commands and returning a response.

Here's what the user/kernel address space looks like upon initial
entry into `xde_dld_ioc_opte_cmd()`. The key point this visual is
meant to convey is that at initial entry into the parent handler the
`req_bytes` and `resp_bytes` pointers still point to the userland
buffers. The `OpteCmdIoctl` data was copied-in by DLD on xde's behalf,
visualized by the dotted line from `karg` to `arg`. At this point the
xde ioctl handler still needs to copy-in the request. After processing
it needs to copy-out the response value to `resp_bytes` (`0x86ddf20`)
as well as the `OpteCmdIoctl` itself in order to update the
`resp_len_needed` value. Keep in mind this shows the logical value of
what's in `req_bytes`. The real value is actually the byte stream
produced from serializing this request value.


----
      âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ
  â â âarg: 0x86de011               â
      âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ
  â                  â
                     â¼
  â OpteCmdIoctlâââââââââââââââââââââââ             ListLayersReqââââââââ
    â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ â             âââââââââââââââââââââ
  â â âapi_version: 0x1             â â     ââââââââ¶ââport_name: "xde0"âââââ
    â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ¤ â     â       âââââââââââââââââââââ  â
  â â âcmd: OpteCmd::ListLayers     â â     â       âââââââââââââââââââââ  â
    â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ¤ â     â                              â
  â â âreq_bytes: 0x86dd010         âââ¼ââââââ                              â
    â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ¤ â                                    â
  â â âreq_len: 18                  â â             âââââââââââââââââââ    â
    â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ¤ â             ââââ¬ââ¬ââ¬ââ¬ââ¬ââ¬ââ¬âââ    â
  â â âresp_bytes: 0x86ddf20        âââ¼âââââââââââââ¶ââ0â0â0â0â0â0â0â0ââ    â
    â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ¤ â             ââââ´ââ´ââ´ââ´ââ´ââ´ââ´âââ    â
  â â âresp_len: 16384 (16K)        â â             âââââââââââââââââââ    â
    â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ¤ â                      â²             â
  â â âresp_len_needed: 0           â â                      â             â
    â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ â                      â             â
  â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ                      â             â
                                                             â             â
  â                                                          â             â
                                                             â             â
  â                           User Address Space             â             â
   â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â
  â                          Kernel Address Space            â             â
                                                             â             â
â â´ â â â â â â â â â â                                      â             â
     ddi_copyin(9F)    â                                     â             â
â â¬ â â â â â â â â â â                                      â             â
     âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ                         â             â
  â â¶âkarg: 0xfffffeb4eaafbe00     â                         â             â
     âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ                         â             â
                    â                                        â             â
   OpteCmdIoctlââââââ¼âââââââââââââââââ                       â             â
   â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ â                       â             â
   â âapi_version: 0x1             â â                       â             â
   â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ¤ â                       â             â
   â âcmd: OpteCmd::ListLayers     âââ¼ââââââââââââââââââââââââ¼ââââââââââââââ
   â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ¤ â                       â
   â âreq_bytes: 0x86dd010         â â                       â
   â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ¤ â                       â
   â âreq_len: 18                  â â                       â
   â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ¤ â                       â
   â âresp_bytes: 0x86ddf20        âââ¼ââââââââââââââââââââââââ
   â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ¤ â
   â âresp_len: 16384 (16K)        â â
   â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ¤ â
   â âresp_len_needed: 0           â â
   â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ â
   âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ
----

Here's what the address spaces look like after `list_layers_hdlr()` has
called `IoctlEnvelope::copy_in_req()`. Notice the kernel now has its
own copy of the `ListLayersReq` that it can access. Once again, keep
in mind that the truth is a little more complicated: `req_bytes`
contains the serialized bytes of `ListLayersReq`, and the
`IoctlEnvelope::copy_in_req()` deserializes the byte stream to create
a `ListLayersReq` value on the stack.

----
      âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ
  â â âarg: 0x86de011               â
      âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ
  â                  â
                     â¼
  â OpteCmdIoctlâââââââââââââââââââââââ             ListLayersReqââââââââ
    â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ â             âââââââââââââââââââââ
  â â âapi_version: 0x1             â â     ââââââââ¶ââport_name: "xde0"ââ
    â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ¤ â     â       âââââââââââââââââââââ
  â â âcmd: OpteCmd::ListLayers     â â     â       âââââââââââââââââââââ
    â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ¤ â     â
  â â âreq_bytes: 0x86dd010         âââ¼ââââââ
    â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ¤ â
  â â âreq_len: 18                  â â             âââââââââââââââââââ
    â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ¤ â             ââââ¬ââ¬ââ¬ââ¬ââ¬ââ¬ââ¬âââ
  â â âresp_bytes: 0x86ddf20        âââ¼âââââââââââââ¶ââ0â0â0â0â0â0â0â0ââ
    â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ¤ â             ââââ´ââ´ââ´ââ´ââ´ââ´ââ´âââ
  â â âresp_len: 16384 (16K)        â â             âââââââââââââââââââ
    â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ¤ â                      â²
  â â âresp_len_needed: 0           â â                      â
    â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ â                      â
  â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ                      â
                                                             â
  â                                                          â
                                                             â
  â                           User Address Space             â
   â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â
  â                          Kernel Address Space            â
                                                             â
â â´ â â â â â â â â â â                                      â
     ddi_copyin(9F)    â                                     â
â â¬ â â â â â â â â â â                                      â
     âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ                         â
  â â¶âkarg: 0xfffffeb4eaafbe00     â                         â
     âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ                         â
                    â                                        â
   OpteCmdIoctlââââââ¼âââââââââââââââââ               ListLayersReqââââââââ
   â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ â               âââââââââââââââââââââ
   â âapi_version: 0x1             â â      âââââââââ¶ââport_name: "xde0"ââ
   â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ¤ â      â        âââââââââââââââââââââ
   â âcmd: OpteCmd::ListLayers     â â      â        âââââââââ¬ââââââââââââ
   â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ¤ â      â                â
   â âreq_bytes: 0xfffffeb4eaaf... âââ¼âââââââ                â
   â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ¤ â                       â
   â âreq_len: 18                  â â                       â
   â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ¤ â                       â
   â âresp_bytes: 0x86ddf20        âââ¼ââââââââââââââââââââââââ
   â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ¤ â
   â âresp_len: 16384 (16K)        â â
   â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ¤ â
   â âresp_len_needed: 0           â â
   â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ â
   âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ
----


Finally, here's the address space after `hdlr_resp()` has called
`IoctlEnvelope::copy_out_resp()`. Notice the response has been
copied-out to the user's `resp_bytes` buffer **AND** the kernel's copy
of `OpteCmdIoctl` has been copied-out as well to overwrite the user's
copy. This later step is required in order to update `resp_len_needed`
which is how the client knows how many bytes to read during
deserialization. Once again, I'm showing the logical view of
`resp_bytes` here. The reality is that it points to the serialized
bytes and the client uses this pointer along with `resp_len_needed` to
deserialize into a `ListLayersResp` value on the stack.

----
      âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ
  â ââ¶âarg: 0x86de011               â
      âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ
  â                  â
                     â¼
  â OpteCmdIoctlâââââââââââââââââââââââ             ListLayersReqââââââââ
    â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ â             âââââââââââââââââââââ
  â â âapi_version: 0x1             â â     ââââââââ¶ââport_name: "xde0"ââ
    â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ¤ â     â       âââââââââââââââââââââ
  â â âcmd: OpteCmd::ListLayers     â â     â       âââââââââââââââââââââ
    â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ¤ â     â
  â â âreq_bytes: 0x86dd010         âââ¼ââââââ
    â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ¤ â
  â â âreq_len: 18                  â â             ListLayersRespâââââââ
    â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ¤ â             âââââââââââââââââââââ
  â â âresp_bytes: 0x86ddf20        âââ¼âââââââââââââ¶ââlayers: Vec<...> ââ
    â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ¤ â             âââââââââââââââââââââ
  â â âresp_len: 16384 (16K)        â â             âââââââââââââââââââââ
    â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ¤ â                       â²
  â â âresp_len_needed: 179         â â
    â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ â                       â
  â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ
                                                              â
  â
                                                              â
  â                           User Address Space
   â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â â âââ â â â â â â â
  â                          Kernel Address Space
                                                              â
â â´ â â â â â â â â â â
    ddi_copyout(9F)    â                                      â
â â¬ â â â â â â â â â â
     âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ                          â
  â ââkarg: 0xfffffeb4eaafbe00     â
     âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ                          â
                    â
   OpteCmdIoctlââââââ¼âââââââââââââââââ               ListLayersReqââââââââ
   â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ â               âââââââââââââââââââââ
   â âapi_version: 0x1             â â      âââââââââ¶ââport_name: "xde0"ââ
   â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ¤ â      â        âââââââââââââââââââââ
   â âcmd: OpteCmd::ListLayers     â â      â        ââââââââââ¬âââââââââââ
   â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ¤ â      â
   â âreq_bytes: 0xfffffeb4eaaf... âââ¼âââââââ                 â
   â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ¤ â
   â âreq_len: 18                  â â                        â
   â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ¤ â             â â â â â â â â â â â
   â âresp_bytes: 0x86ddf20        ââââ â â â â â â   ddi_copyout(9F)
   â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ¤ â             â â â â â â â â â â â
   â âresp_len: 16384 (16K)        â â
   â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ¤ â
   â âresp_len_needed: 179         â â
   â âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ â
   âââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââââ
----

== Code Conventions

Unwrap:: A panic in the kernel is for keeps. Any `unwrap()` call is a
potentially angry (understandably so) support call in the future. For
this reason `unwrap()` should be agressively avoided; in all other
cases an `Unwrap:` comment should comment on why this particular
instance is an acceptable risk (or in some cases no risk at all).